=head1 NAME

use/unuse - Load, unload, or display dotkits, also known as I<packages>.

=head1 SYNOPSIS

use [ B<-alqv> ] [ I<pkg> ... ]

unuse [ B<-alqv> ] [ I<pkg> ... ]

reuse [ B<-alqv> ] [ I<pkg> ... ]

=head1 OPTIONS

=over 6

=item B<-a>

Append components from the given package(s) to the end of the
environment variables they affect.
This generally makes the added component(s) the I<last> item searched
instead of the I<first>,
as is the behavior of the default I<Prepend> action.
This option has no effect with the I<unuse> command.

Note: Don't use this option unless you know what you're doing.
The default prepend action is
better at avoiding possible conflicts with any pre-existing dotkits
or PATH components, etc.
The only common package that should arguably be appended is
the '.' (dot) package,
which adds '.' to your PATH.

=item B<-l>

The B<-l> "long listing" option
turns off the interpretation (sourcing) of any I<pkg> arguments that follow.
With no other arguments,
this option produces a summary of available dotkits.
If a I<pkg> argument follows,
the descriptive text and any help text for that I<pkg> is
printed to the screen.
If no package whose name exactly macthes I<pkg> is found,
a summary of available packages whose name, category, or short description
includes I<pkg> in a case-insensitive pattern-match search is printed to the screen.
The B<-l> option can be combined with B<-v> to produce more verbose output.
With no arguments, B<-lv> prints a usage message,
a list of packages currently in use,
a summary of available packages,
and a list of all nodes in the Dotkit search path.
With a I<pkg> argument, B<-lv> prints the entire contents of the I<pkg>.
The B<-l> option is quietly ignored by I<unuse>.

=item B<-q>

Make I<use>, I<unuse>, or I<reuse> quiet in operation.
You generally want this option for commands inside startup dotfiles.

=item B<-v>

Be verbose about the location of
package files found in satisfying your request.
With B<-l>, show the full contents of any I<pkg> arguments,
or give a more verbose listing, if no arguments were given.

=back

If no package arguments are given,
a usage message is displayed,
followed by a list of the available packages.
It is sometimes handy to save the output of this
usage message in a file.
Since the I<use> command is an alias for csh and tcsh,
it may require some extra syntax to redirect its output:

  (use -lv) > mycopy.out

=head1 DESCRIPTION

I<Use> and I<unuse> help
you control and understand your Unix environment.
They simplify dotfile setup and maintenance,
and are also available for interactive use,
allowing you to easily modify your environment as you go.
Together, the use/unuse pair provides a do/undo facility
that is convenient, informative, and quick.

Suppose your site has an application named "viztools",
made up of one or more executable programs, documentation, etc.
In order to add the needed components to your PATH,
MANPATH, or other environment variables
necessary for your use of those programs,
you say

  use viztools.

Assuming all is well, you'll get a message

  Prepending: viztools (ok),

which means that the package file was found, and your PATH,
MANPATH, or other environment variables needed to access it were
adjusted correctly.
(If you give the B<-a> option, the message will instead say "Appending",
and any new components will be added at the end of the respective
variable, instead of the beginning.)

If you type "use viztools" again, it will say

  Prepending: viztools (already loaded),

meaning that the package has already been read once.
If you typed "use vzitools" (mis-spelled),
the response would read

  Prepending: vzitools (not found),

to let you know that the requested package had a problem of some sort.

Later on, when you are done, you say

  unuse viztools

and all the relevant adjustments will be made to your environment
to remove the package, with the message

  Dropping: viztools (ok).

You can use or unuse more than one package at a time.
Typing "use" or "unuse" without arguments causes a help message
to be printed.
You can get a list of all the packages available for
a given platform by typing "use -l" with no arguments,
and you can learn more about the I<viztools> package by
typing "use -l viztools".

If you know you always want I<viztools> to be loaded,
you can add the line "use -q viztools"
(the B<-q> option makes the command quiet)
into one of your dotfiles,
and get it automatically included whenever you start a session.

=head2 Dotfile setup

The setup required to make the
I<use> command available is simple.
Add the following line to your .profile or .cshrc file,
or execute it directly in a current shell window,
if you don't want to modify your startup file:

  eval `/<path_to>/dotkit/init`

(The I</path_to> portion varies among sites.  At LLNL, it is
generally "/usr/gapps".)
The script usually guesses your shell type correctly.
If you get complaints about "command not found", or
"unbound variable", or "parameter not set",
you may need to tell it explicitly
what kind of shell you are using:

  eval `/<path_to>/dotkit/init -b` # bash or ksh
  eval `/<path_to>/dotkit/init -c` # csh or tcsh

I<Init> adds aliases or shell functions for "use", "unuse",
and related commands,
and sets the two environment variables SYS_TYPE and DK_ROOT
if they are not set already.
The exact commands to initialize Dotkit at your site may
be slightly different.

In addition to evaluating the output of I<dotkit/init>,
you may want to go ahead and read a few packages
in your dotfiles.
Lines such as follows can be added to your .profile, .login
or .cshrc files, after the ``eval ...'' line:

  use -q bin usr sbin x11
  use -qa .        # Puts '.' last on your path.

The four packages loaded in the first line arrange to put /bin,
/usr/bin, /sbin, and (usually) /usr/bin/X11 on the PATH,
and set up MANPATH accordingly.
The action of the x11 package will vary - on Linux systems,
it adds /usr/X11R6/{bin,man} to the PATH and MANPATH, respectively.
The last package loaded, a literal '.' (dot), appends '.' to your PATH.

It does no harm to ask for a package that isn't present on all platforms.
Let "use" sort out which packages are actually available on your
current system.
You'll get it on those platforms where it is installed,
and the request is quietly skipped otherwise.

It is redundant (but does no harm) to put code like

  if($SYS_TYPE == "solaris_8_s64") then
    use -q SUNWspro # load sun compilers
  endif

in your dotfiles.
This is just the kind of check that "use" is designed to do for you.

You can start using Dotkit interactively without making any changes to
your dotfiles other than the "eval" line above.
It won't change your environment except when you "use"
or "unuse" packages. 
Alternatively,
you can start from a mostly empty environment,
and use Dotkit commands to build the one you like.

=head2 Searching for packages

To look at a list of all the available packages for your current SYS_TYPE,
type "use -l" with no arguments,
This gives you a categorized listing of packages,
with a short description of what each one does.

The I<search> package allows you to type in a word or pattern,
much like grep(1),
then looks through all the available dotkits for lines that
match that word or pattern.
To use it, simply type "use search".
It prompts for the pattern,
and prints the results to your screen.

To see the entire contents of a given package,
type "use -lv I<pkg>".

To find packages,
I<use> and I<unuse> look in $HOME/.kits/,
if that directory exists, then each component of DK_NODE,
if it exists,
and finally in DK_ROOT,
for files named I<*.dk>.
To be precise, they look first in three subdirectories of each of
those directories, in the following order:
I<*sh>/$SYS_TYPE, $SYS_TYPE, I<*sh>,
where I<*sh> stands for whichever of I<bash>, I<csh>,
I<ksh>, or I<tcsh> is your login shell,
and $SYS_TYPE is the name of the current system type.
In this way, you (or the Dotkit maintainer)
can specialize a package to a given architecture
or shell if needed,
and arrange for that package to over-ride a "generic" version
whenever someone is running on the given architecture,
or with the given shell.
Most packages are independent of shell and SYS_TYPE.
For more on the package search process,
see the dotkit(7) man page.

=head2 Dot floats

The dot (.) character has a special meaning when discussing
Unix directories,
signifying your current working directory.
Many users add ``dot'', called '.' hereafter,
to their PATH environment variable
so as to be able to easily execute programs located in
the current directory,
wherever that might be.
Although there are some security considerations,
this convenience is important.
Dotkit supports the use of '.' with a special package by that name:

  use .         # Puts '.' at the beginning of your PATH.
  use -a .      # Puts '.' at the end of your PATH.

Moreover, once '.' is in your PATH,
(or any other colon-separated environment variable,)
Dotkit arranges for it to "float" up or down
as future changes are made,
so as to always remain at the beginning or end.

=head2 Writing your own package files

As a simple example,
suppose you keep some personal programs at $HOME/bin,
with their associated man pages under $HOME/man.
You can add a personal package to Dotkit by creating
the new file $HOME/.kits/mybin.dk, containing
the following five lines:

  #c personal
  #d My very own programs

  dk_alter PATH $HOME/bin
  dk_alter MANPATH $HOME/man

Most package files are no more complicated than that.
To learn more about writing package files,
and the overall organization of Dotkit,
see the man pages for dk-examples(5), dk-commands(5) and dotkit(7).
They give extensive instruction on the usually simple,
but occasionally subtle, art of writing package files.

=head1 BUGS

Unuse removes the I<first> instance of a given component from
PATH, MANPATH, etc.
(There could be more than one if your PATH was not empty
when Dotkit was initialized,
or if two packages happened to include the same component.)
This is usually correct,
but can be wrong in a few cases.

I<Use> and I<unuse> are aliases in csh and tcsh;
you can't re-direct their output to a file.
(However, you can pipe their output to another command,
so "use|cat>file" will usually get the job done.
Failing that, try a subshell: "(use -lv)>file".)

=head1 AUTHOR

The original author of Dotkit is
Lee Busby, Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory.
Adam Moody, also of LLNL,
has made additional major contributions.

=head1 COPYRIGHT

Copyright (c) 2004, The Regents of the University of California.
See the file named "Copyright" for the full text of the copyright notice.

=head1 SEE ALSO

L<dk-commands>(5), L<dk-examples>(5), L<dotkit>(7), L<use>(1), L<dk-admin>(8).

=cut
