=head1 NAME

Basic task descriptions for the Dotkit administrator.

=head1 DESCRIPTION

This man page gives instructions to the administrator,
covering several common situations.

=head2 Installing Dotkit at a new site

Here are a couple of basic pre-install questions to answer:

(1) Who will administer Dotkit for your site?
If there is more than one person,
it makes sense to set up a Unix group for Dotkit maintainers.

(2) Will any or all of them have root privileges?
This is not a requirement for Dotkit.
If you do use root, then group ownership of your Dotkit distribution
is less of an issue.
If you don't, it becomes more important.
(See I<Preening the permission bits> below.

=over 2

=item 1.  Unpack the distribution tar file.

One approach is to choose a location for dotkit that is visible to all users,
typically an NFS file system mounted on every machine at your site.
Putting all your eggs in one basket requires a reliable basket.

Another approach is to put a copy of Dotkit on each host,
at, say, I</usr/dotkit> or I</etc/dotkit>.
Then change one master copy, and utilize a synchronizing tool
to push or pull changes to each host.
This requires more work, but may provide better service in
a large network.

For the sake of example, let's put Dotkit at I</foo>:

  % gunzip -c dotkit.tgz | (cd /foo; tar xf -)

=item 2.  Set the value of DK_ROOT in your current shell process.

  % setenv DK_ROOT /foo/dotkit # csh or tcsh
  % export DK_ROOT=/foo/dotkit # bash or ksh

=item 3.  Make necessary soft links.

  % cd /foo/dotkit/etc
  % make links

=item 4.  Format the man pages and html documents.

  % cd /foo/dotkit/man
  % make

=item 5.  Run the test suite.

  % cd /foo/dotkit/etc/test
  % make
  mutex1: ok (ksh) ok (bash) ok (csh) ok (tcsh) 
  recursive1: ok (ksh) ok (bash) ok (csh) ok (tcsh) 
   [ etc. ]

All the tests should complete without error for each shell
you support.

=item 6.  Write dotkits to define your site.

If your site is named I<foo>,
the convention for its Dotkit node name is I<site=foo>.
It is also conventional to locate the I<site=foo>
directory under I<$DK_ROOT>,
but that is not a requirement.

=item 7.  Add a maintainer file.

Create a one line file, $DK_ROOT/etc/DK_MAINTAINER, with
your name and email address.
This is read and output by the I<use-usage> script,
also in the I<etc> subdirectory.

=item 8.  Add a site node definition file.

Create a one line file, $DK_ROOT/etc/DK_NODE.
It contains one or more colon separated pathnames
to your site specific Dotkit nodes.

=item 9.  Verify that I<etc/systype> produces correct results.

Each platform architecture at your site is expected to
have an associated I<SYS_TYPE>.
The value of that environment variable is used by Dotkit
to find kits that are specific to the given platform.

If $SYS_TYPE is pre-defined before initializing Dotkit,
that value is accepted.
Otherwise, I<$DK_ROOT/init> calls the script 
I<$DK_ROOT/etc/systype>,
which attempts to compute an appropriate value for I<SYS_TYPE>.

If you have another system in place to define I<SYS_TYPE>,
such as setting it in I</etc/profile>,
this step may not be necessary.
Dotkit will still work even if I<SYS_TYPE> is unknown,
but it obviously will not find any I<SYS_TYPE>-specific kits.

=back

=head2 Supporting the Dotkit user

A variety of problems may be presented,
some more common than others
Here is a list of things to check,
that will likely make the solution clear for the common issues.

=over 2

=item 1. Check the variables related to Dotkit:

Generate a list of Dotkit-related
environment and shell variables as follows:

  (env;set) | grep -i dk | sort -u

Five variables are essential:

=over 2

=item * DK_ROOT: The location where Dotkit is installed.

=item * DK_NODE: Zero or more additional nodes to search.

=item * DK_SUBNODE: The sub-directories within a node.

=item * _dk_rl: The current recursion level.

The last variable (_dk_rl) should always have a value of -1
when your shell is at the prompt.
If it does not,
the most common cause is a keyboard
interrupt (Control-C) while the shell
is in the process of reading a dotkit.
Typing "use" with no arguments should restore the correct value.

=item * _dk_inuse: List of packages currently in use.

This is a whitespace-separated list of the packages that
have been used.
The trailing digit on each name is the recursion level
at which the package was encountered.

=back

Some additional Dotkit-related variables may also appear.
I<_dk_sev_FOO> is the saved value of an environment
variable named I<FOO>,
which was reset by some package as it loaded.
The saved value will be restored to I<FOO>
(and I<_dk_sev_FOO> will disappear)
when the package is unused.

=item 2. Verify they are finding the expected dotkit.

Run I<reuse -v foo>, where I<foo> is the name of any dotkit
that seems to be mis-behaving.
This will show you exactly which file is ultimately being source'ed.

Shell startup can get very complicated.
It is not unusual to load a particular dotkit,
and then have some other (non-Dotkit) command buried in an
obscure startup file change the PATH variable in
an unexpected way.

The user complains that kit I<foo> is "already loaded",
but the component it was supposed to add to PATH isn't there.
Trying to "use foo" won't fix the trouble.
However, "reuse foo" is often a good strategy in this situation,
because it generally will make things work while you try to
figure out what really went wrong.
There is a special dotkit I<reuse> that sets environment variable
I<DK_UEQRU> to 1.
When this is so,
the I<use> command always behaves as if I<reuse> had been typed.
Some sites like to do this as a matter of policy.

=item 3. Verify that $DK_ROOT/init is doing the right thing.

Normally, you I<eval> the output of this script:

  eval `/usr/gapps/dotkit/init`

For debugging purposes, you can run it directly,
(take off the I<eval> and the surrounding backquotes,)
and check that it is printing the correct set of commands
for your shell.

The init script emits a pair of shell-independent commands that
set the value of $DK_ROOT, if it wasn't set already,
then pass further processing on to a shell-specific script that
does the rest of the setup.

If your shell seems to be getting confused, ("export: command not
found", or "setenv: command not found", or "unbound variable", or
"parameter not set") it is possible to force
the init script to emit commands for a particular kind of shell.
Use the "-b" option to force Bourne-shell (bash or ksh) style initialization.
Use the "-c" option to force C-shell (csh or tcsh) style initialization.

=item 4. Look at the output from I<use-usage>.

The script I<$DK_ROOT/etc/use-usage> is run whenever you
type ``use'' with no arguments.
You can also run it directly.
Verify that the list of packages on the first screen
matches I<_dk_inuse>,
and that the Dotkit search path
matches the values in I<DK_ROOT>, I<DK_NODE>, and I<DK_SUBNODE>.
Its arguments are documented at the beginning of the script.

=back

=head2 Adding, changing, or removing a dotkit

Decide where the new dotkit belongs.
If it is a personal preference,
it belongs in I<$HOME/.kits>.
Otherwise, it may be part of
a group project, site-specific, or universal.

Group projects that want to define dotkits for their use
typically need to add a group node to DK_NODE before
initializing Dotkit:

  setenv DK_NODE /usr/local/share/<project>/kits
  eval `/foo/dotkit/init`

Site-specific kits are added under the I<site=XYZ> directory,
while universal kits are under $DK_ROOT itself.

See the L<dk-examples>(5) man page for a listing of Dotkit categories
and many example dotkits.
After your change is complete,
be sure to commit it to your source code management system,
and preen permission bits:

  % cd $DK_ROOT
  % ./etc/preen

=head2 Updating the man or html pages

Source text for the man and html pages is located at I<$DK_ROOT/man>.
The format is known as POD (Plain Old Documentation),
developed and distributed as part of the Perl language.
See the I<perlpod>, I<pod2man>, and I<pod2html> man pages
for details on how to write and process POD files.

Briefly, modify the appropriate I<*.pod> file in I<$DK_ROOT/man>,
then run I<make>.
If there are no errors,
this should reconstitute the formatted man and html pages.
You need to be on a platform where the full Perl distribution
is installed in order to run I<pod2man>, etc.

=head2 Running the test suite

Change directory to $DK_ROOT/etc/test,
and run I<make>.
This should run a series of I<mutex>,
I<recursive>, and I<simple> regression tests for
each supported shell.
You hope to see I<ok> for every test and every shell.
If you do, it means that every file under the I<dif>
sub-directory will be zero length.

If there is a problem,
you can inspect the corresponding I<dif> file to begin
analyzing what went wrong.

=head2 Adding an MOTD (message of the day)

Create a file named I<dk-news>,
located at I<$DK_ROOT/etc>,
with the literal text of your message.
Every user who subsequently runs I<use> without arguments
will see your text on the first splash page of output.

=head2 Preening the permission bits

If a group of people administer Dotkit for a site,
it is best to create a Unix group,
say I<dotkit>, with those users in it.
There is a script at I<$DK_ROOT/etc/preen>,
which will attempt to make all the files under $DK_ROOT
have the correct group ownership and permission bits.
(Permissions are generally set to allow group write on
files and directories,
and world read/access/execute as appropriate.)
If the Dotkit administrative group does not use I<root>,
then each dotkit administrator needs to run I<preen>
whenever they change files,
to set the permissions on files that they own.

=head2 Making a tar ball

Change directory to I<$DK_ROOT/etc>,
and run I<make export>.
Anyone can do this,
as it does not change anything under $DK_ROOT.
(It does elide CVS subdirectories from the output tar file.)

The smallest tar file is made using
I<make clean export> (note whitespace),
which throws away all temporary files, soft links,
and the formatted man pages.

A third option is I<make cleanexport>,
which re-creates the formatted man pages before tarring up the result.

=head1 ENVIRONMENT

(Dotkit environment variables are documented in L<dk-commands>(5).)

=head1 AUTHOR

The original author of Dotkit is
Lee Busby, Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory.
Adam Moody, also of LLNL,
has made additional major contributions.

=head1 COPYRIGHT

Copyright (c) 2004, The Regents of the University of California.
See the file named "Copyright" for the full text of the copyright notice.

=head1 SEE ALSO

L<dk-commands>(5), L<dk-examples>(5), L<dotkit>(7), L<use>(1), L<dk-admin>(8).

=cut
